**********
Conclusion
**********

Beware false confidence. You may soon develop a smug sense of satisfaction that
*your* work doesn't screw up like everyone else's. But I have not given you a
thorough introduction to the mathematics of data analysis. There are many ways
to foul up statistics beyond these simple conceptual errors.

Errors will occur often, because somehow, few undergraduate science degrees or
medical schools require courses in statistics and experimental design -- and
some introductory statistics courses skip over issues of statistical power and
multiple inference. This is seen as acceptable despite the paramount role of
data and statistical analysis in the pursuit of modern science; we wouldn't
accept doctors who have no experience with prescription medication, so why do we
accept scientists with no training in statistics? Scientists need formal
statistical training and advice. To quote:

.. epigraph::

    "To consult the statistician after an experiment is finished is often merely
    to ask him to conduct a post mortem examination. He can perhaps say what the
    experiment died of." 

    -- R. A. Fisher, popularizer of the *p* value

Journals may choose to reject research with poor-quality statistical analyses,
and new guidelines and protocols may eliminate some problems, but until we have
scientists adequately trained in the principles of statistics, experimental
design and data analysis will not be improved.  The all-consuming quest for
statistical significance will only continue.

Change will not be easy. Rigorous statistical standards don't come free: if
scientists start routinely performing statistical power computations, for
example, they'll soon discover they need vastly larger sample sizes to reach
solid conclusions. Clinical trials are not free, and more expensive research
means fewer published trials. You might object that scientific progress will be
slowed needlessly -- but isn't it worse to build our progress on a foundation of
unsound results?

To any science students: invest in a statistics course or two while you have the
chance. To researchers: invest in training, a good book, and statistical
advice. And please, the next time you hear someone say "The result was
significant with :math:`p < 0.05`, so there's only a 1 in 20 chance it's a
fluke!", please beat them over the head with a statistics textbook for me.

**Disclaimer:** The advice in this guide cannot substitute for the advice of a
trained statistical professional. If you think you're suffering from any serious
statistical error, please consult a statistician immediately. I shall not have
any liability from any injury to your dignity, statistical error or
misconception suffered as a result of your use of this website.

Use of this guide to justify rejecting the results of a scientific study without
reviewing the evidence in any detail whatsoever is grounds for being slapped
upside the head with a very large statistics textbook.  This guide should help
you find statistical errors, not allow you to selectively ignore science you
don't like.
