.. _wrought:

*********************
What have we wrought?
*********************

I've painted a grim picture. But anyone can pick out small details in published
studies and produce a tremendous list of errors. Do these problems matter? 

Well, yes. I wouldn't have written this otherwise.

John Ioannidis's famous article "Why Most Published Research Findings are
False"\ :cite:p:`Ioannidis:2005bw` was grounded in mathematical concerns rather
than an empirical test of research results. If most research articles have poor
statistical power -- and :ref:`they do <power>` -- while researchers have the
freedom to choose among multitudes of analyses methods to get favorable results
-- and :ref:`they do <freedom>` -- when most tested hypotheses are false and
most true hypotheses correspond to very small effects, we are mathematically
determined to get a multitude of false positives.

.. index:: oncological ontology

But if you want empiricism, you can have it, courtesy of John Ioannidis and
Jonathan Schoenfeld. They studied the question "Is everything we eat associated
with cancer?"\ :cite:p:`Schoenfeld:2013fq`\ [#ontology]_ After choosing fifty
common ingredients out of a cookbook, they set out to find studies linking them
to cancer rates -- and found 216 studies on forty different ingredients. Of
course, most of the studies disagreed with each other. Most ingredients had
multiple studies claiming they increased *and* decreased the risk of getting
cancer. Most of the statistical evidence was weak, and meta-analyses usually
showed much smaller effects on cancer rates than the original studies.

Of course, being contradicted by follow-up studies and meta-analyses doesn't
prevent a paper from being cited as though it were true. Even effects which have
been contradicted by massive follow-up trials with unequivocal results are
frequently cited five or ten years later, with scientists apparently not
noticing that the results are false.\ :cite:p:`Tatsioni:2007cr` Of course, new
findings get widely publicized in the press, while contradictions and
corrections are hardly ever mentioned.\ :cite:p:`Gonon:2012do` You can hardly
blame the scientists for not keeping up.

.. index:: schizophrenia

Let's not forget the merely biased results. Poor reporting standards in medical
journals mean studies testing new treatments for schizophrenia can neglect to
include the scale they used to evaluate symptoms -- a handy source of bias, as
trials using unpublished scales tend to produce better results than those using
previously validated tests.\ :cite:p:`Marshall:2000hg` Other medical studies
simply :ref:`omit particular results <omit-details>` if they're not favorable or
interesting, biasing subsequent meta-analyses to only include positive
results. A third of meta-analyses are estimated to suffer from this problem.\
:cite:p:`Kirkham:2010kj`

.. index:: meta-analyses

Another review compared meta-analyses to subsequent large randomized controlled
trials, considered the gold standard in medicine. In over a third of cases, the
randomized trial's outcome did not correspond well to the meta-analysis.\
:cite:p:`LeLorier:1997ww` Other comparisons of meta-analyses to subsequent
research found that most results were inflated, with perhaps a fifth
representing false positives.\ :cite:p:`Pereira:2011eg`

.. index:: psychic powers, confidence interval, power; psychic powers

Let's not forget the multitude of physical science papers which misuse
confidence intervals.\ :cite:p:`Lanzante:2005hi` Or the peer-reviewed psychology
paper allegedly providing evidence for psychic powers, on the basis of
uncontrolled multiple comparisons in exploratory studies.\
:cite:p:`Wagenmakers:2011tp` Unsurprisingly, results failed to be replicated --
by scientists who appear not to have calculated the statistical power of their
tests.\ :cite:p:`Galak:2012fd`

We have a problem. Let's work on fixing it.

.. [#ontology] An important part of the ongoing `Oncological Ontology
   <http://dailymailoncology.tumblr.com/>`__ project to
   categorize everything into two categories: that which cures cancer and that
   which causes it.
